---
title: "The Ultimate PATH Management Guide"
layout: post
---

## Basics of Environment Variables and PATH

Each process has an *environment*, a set of variables that the process can read
or write. When the process spawns another process, the new process inherits the
environment of its parent. These values are nevertheless *local*: the child
inherits a copy of the variables of the parent at creation-time. If the parent
later changes his variables, the change will not be reflected on the child's
variables.

One particularly interesting environment variable is called `PATH`: it defines
the paths to search to find an executable specified by name. The value of this
variable is a list of paths separated by a separator (`:` on Unix-based OSes
like Mac OS X and Linux, `;` on Windows).

This is particularly relevant on the command line: when you type the name of a
program (for instance `ls` in Unix), it will search the paths listed in the
`PATH` variable (from left to right) until it finds one containing a `ls`
executable.

We'll now see how each OS handles environment variables and the `PATH`. One
particular question that will interest us is how the "default" value for the
environment variables (and the `PATH` in particular) are set.

## Windows

In Windows, the initial values for environment variables are stored in the
[registry].

[registry]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Registry

These are separated between system values and user values. If a variable has
both a system and user value, the user value takes precedence, **excepted** for
the PATH, where both values get concatenated (user PATH, `;`, system PATH).

- User environment variables are stored in `HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Environment`.
- System environment variables are stored in
  `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session
  Manager\Environment`.

`explorer.exe` will immediately reflect any change to these values, and any
program launched by it will inherit these values.

All other programs, on the other hand, need to be restarted. A few comments
about programs of interest:

- The [Launchy](http://www.launchy.net/) app launcher automatically updates the
  environment before launching a program.

- The [ConEmu](https://conemu.github.io/) console emulator is by default
  configured to hijack the opening of new consoles and open them in the existing
  ConEmu window instead (this is a good thing). The problem that is when
  intercepting consoles opened by `explorer.exe`, the environment seems to be set to
  that of the ConEmu window (i.e. the environment when a console was first
  launched). See [this issue](https://github.com/Maximus5/ConEmu/issues/468).

**How to change the environment**

- Locally in a console: use the built-in [set] command.
  You can clear a variable by assigning it nothing: `set X=`.

- Globally in a console: use [setx] (built-in Windows
  7+, [download][setx-dl] for previous versions)

- From the explorer, [follow these instructions][explorer].

- Use the excellent [Rapid Environment Editor][rapidee]

[set]: http://ss64.com/nt/set.html
[setx]: http://ss64.com/nt/setx.html
[setx-dl]: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=18546
[explorer]: https://www.java.com/en/download/help/path.xml
[rapidee]: https://www.rapidee.com/en/about

**Running scripts on the command line**

On Windows, it is customary to append an extension to executables binaries
(`.exe`) and scripts (`.bat`, `.sh`, `.py`, ...). However, typing this extension
to run the program is not very desirable.

There is an environment variable called `PATHEXT` which holds a list of all
extensions that can be run on the command line. Basically, if a file has its
extension in this list, you can type its name ommitting the extension and it
will run as though you double clicked it. There might be some additional finesse
here, but it will be like this most of the time. The order of the extensions
inside `PATHEXT` is important if there are two files with the same name but
different extensions. Extensions earlier in the list have more priority.

## Unix

Both Mac OS X and Linux are Unix-based OSes. As such, the basic principles of
how environment variables are handled is similar. I'll explain this here before
talking about the peculiarities of each OS.

In Unix, a process does not automatically inherit all the environment variables
of its parents. It only inherits those that are explicitly exported.

In a shell script, or on the command line, we can mark a variable `X` for export
by writing `export X`. This can also be combined with the definition of the
variable: `export X="some stuff"`. You can un-export something with `export -n`.
Removing purely and simply a variable is done with `unset`.

On Unix, environment variables are initialized by shell scripts. Some scripts
are executed each time a shell is run. Which scripts are run depends on whether
the shell is a *login shell* and wether it is *interactive*.

The rules are rather complex,
but [this page does a good job at summarizing them][shell_init].

Also beware that your scripts may source other files, including those that
mentionned in that guide.

[shell_init]: https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv/wiki/Unix-shell-initialization

When taking inheritance into account, usually the right thing to do is to define
your environment variables in `~/.profile` or equivalent. One caveat: the file
won't get sourced when running a command remotely via SSH (that is, when running
a command through `ssh` without creating an interactive shell).

**Reloading the environment**

Reloading the environment in an existing shell after you edited `.profile` can
be tricky. One easy solution would be to re-source `.profile`, but there are a
few caveats:

- Sourcing your `.profile` should not have unwanted side-effects.

- Often variables are not just set, but are *modified*. This is typically the

  case for `PATH`, where you append to the existing definition.

  In this case, if you reload the `.profile`, you'll end up with many duplicate
  entries in your PATH, and you'll fail to clear entries you want removed.

Hence: no side-effects; set variables, don't modify them.

## Mac OS X

OS X has a fantastic little utility called `path_helper` that will help you
manage the PATH. Basically what it does is read the files in `/etc/paths.d` and
appends their content to the PATH (one entry per line). Files are read in
lexicographic order, so you can control the order of entries in the PATH.

Ironically, `path_helper` is not itself on the path, so you must call it through
its fully qualified name `/usr/libexec/path_helper`. The output of `path_helper`
is a shell command to set the PATH. This command must itself be evaluated.

I suggest to define the following shell alias for ease of use:

    alias refresh_path='eval `/usr/libexec/path_helper -s`'

The `-s` part is just to ensure a bash-compatible command is generated.

By default, OS X calls `path_helper` in `/etc/profile` so you do not need to add
it yourself.

Oh and by the way, `path_helper` does the same thing it does to `PATH` to
`MANPATH` (which holds the paths used to find manpages) but with the
`/etc/manpaths.d` directory.

Final word of caution: `/etc/paths.d` requires root permission to write into.
However, the files must be readable without root permissions to be used by
`path_helper`. Hence you might need to do a `chmod 644` on the files you create
in that directory.

See [this webpage][path_helper] for more details about `path_helper`

[path_helper]: http://www.softec.lu/site/DevelopersCorner/MasteringThePathHelper

**Setting the PATH for GUI applications**

Ways of defining the PATH for GUI applications on OS X have a history of
breaking. You may read on the net about `~/.MacOSX/environment.plist` or
`launchd.conf`, but those no longer works.

["The" solution][sol], at the time of writing, is to create a file
`~/Library/LaunchAgents/environment.plist`, enter a bunch of boilerplate and
include `launchtl setenv` commands to set environment variables.
See [this explanation][sol] for details.

After a change, you can make it take effect with `launchctl load
~/Library/LaunchAgents/environment.plist` (or wait for a reboot).

Once applied, new applications started from the Finder (or Spotlight) will
inherit the environment variables set in `environment.plist`.

Note that what `environment.plist` does is simply run a script. You could use
that to actually source your `.profile` or invoke `path_helper`. Two solutions
that work with this idea (but doing rather more complicated things) are to be
found [here][sync1] and [here][sync2].

[sol]: http://stackoverflow.com/a/26586170
[sync1]: http://stackoverflow.com/a/32405815
[sync2]: http://superuser.com/a/476960

The difficulty to achieve something so basic is truly baffling.

## Linux

There are too many desktop managers for Linux to cover. Cursory searches seem to
indicate that this aspect isn't too well thought-out however.

However, Linux should, *in theory*, be more scrupulous than OS X about
inheriting the PATH, even in GUI applications. Which means that, editing
`.profile` then login out and login in *should* work as a last resort.

Some distributions (notably Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora) have files called
`~/.pam_environment` and `/etc/environment` where they recommend you define your
environment variables. The benefits of this way of doing things are rather
unclear, since it doesn't seem to enable anything that couldn't be done by
defining variables in `.profile`.
