---
title: "The Tragedy of the Commons"
layout: post
---

["The Tragedy of the Commons"][commons] is a well-known economic parable that describes a
scenario where the action that is optimal for each actor leads to global ruin:

> This was the situation of cattle herders sharing a common parcel of land on
> which they are each entitled to let their cows graze, as was the custom in
> English villages. He (William Forster Lloyd) postulated that if a herder put
> more than his allotted number of cattle on the common, overgrazing could
> result. For each additional animal, a herder could receive additional
> benefits, but the whole group shared damage to the commons. If all herders
> made this individually rational economic decision, the common could be
> depleted or even destroyed, to the detriment of all.

[commons]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons

This may remind you of ["the prisoners' dilemna"][prisoners], which is related:

> Two partners in crime are arrested. The criminals cannot communicate with each
> other. The prosecutor offers both criminals a deal: testify and you will be
> set free while your accomplice serves a three years term. If both testify,
> however, both criminals will spend two years in prison. If none testify, they
> will both spend one year in prison. It is assumed that the decision will have
> no repercurssions beyond the time spent in prison.

Under this scenario, the *dominant* strategy is to betray one's partner.
Whatever the partner ends up doing, you'll end up better if you betray him than
if you don't.

[prisoners]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner%27s_dilemma

In both the tragedy of the commons and the prisoner's dilemna, there is a
rational and superior decision for all participants. And yet if everyone picks
this solution, the outcome is worse than what could be achieved through
collaboration.

Of course human beings do not work with mechanistic rationality. The prisoners'
dilemna in particular is very unlikely to play out this way, because of the
stigma incurred by snitching. Beyond that, basic moral principles would probably
factor in.

Commons-type situations, however, are much more common. On its face, the parable
is about a shared ressource (the titular "commons" — shared pastures). You
probably know fairly well that some people are much less careful with shared
goods than with their own private property. Even more abstract ressources, such
as a buffet or public toilets tend to be abused.

At the core of the abuse is this reflection: I won't pay the consequences, so
why bother? Of course, if everyone thinks like that, there will be consequences,
for everyone.

At a more global level too, the tragedy of the commons is present. Pollution is
a prime example: if a little bit of pollution will turn a bigger profit, why
abstain?

There is usually a fairly big moral stigma associated with taking the rationally
selfish decision in a commons-style situation. This is a natural defense again
situations we realize would be ruinous.

Yet being selfish can be so tempting... Not least because it is perfectly
logical. If others are doing it, why should *I* abstain? If no one else is doing
it, where is the harm? Note the similarity to the reasoning in the prisoners'
dilemna: you have cause to be selfish no matter what the others do.

There are other reasons why it is easy being selfish. First, our actions might
seem individually insignificant. Second, unlike the prisoners' dilemna, the
other parties are a vast anonymous mass, to which you owe little or no loyalty.
Being selfish in the prisoners' dilemna is betraying a comrade. Polluting the
environment is, at first approximation, a victimless crime.

It's so easy in fact that we are very quick to make the selfish decision, when
no-one is looking or can find out, or when the profit outweighs the loss of
moral status.

And that's why — plot twist — we have regulations and need the government. In
its pure and ideal form, the government is a way to make globally optimal
decisions and ensure that all actors play by the rules. The government proclaims
the rules, sets and enforces punishments in case of violations, and actively
seeks to find out violators.

I'm not sure that the role of the government as a shield against "tragedies of
the commons" is well understood, yet it is absolutely primordial. I'm not sure
even politicians understand it, beyond protecting citizens from violence and
abusive business practices — which to be sure are two important commons-style
situation, but also happen to be those that they can pander with fearmongering.

Even at a smaller scale, the spirit of the solution is remarkably similar. Make
a binding agreement that includes all concerned parties. Plan for some negative
consequences should the agreement be broken (shame, shunning and exclusion are
good basic tactics), and finally don't forget to look for violators.

To conclude, I am **not** going to encourage you to act selflessly. You have
nothing to gain, as this article makes clear. But I hope you can now recognize
commons-type situations, and understand the kind of solutions that can be
deployed against them.
